# 5.2 Characteristics

In addition to the basic requirements, the following four characteristics help Participant nodes to be effective: 

1. **Neutrality**. Since nodes are established to coordinate, promote and facilitate data sharing activities among multiple institutions, any perceived lack of neutrality will reduce their effectiveness. For example, other biodiversity institutions and potential partners may be reluctant to collaborate if a node institution is directly involved in generating data for its own research purposes, suggesting it is a competitor or guided by vested interests. However, institutions thus engaged may also build a reputation of trust within the community by offering resources and services—including specialized knowledge about data curation—to other institutions with similar aims. The node should be able to work with all relevant stakeholders, independently of any preferences or priorities that are not defined or agreed by the whole community. The institutional location of the node is decisive for its neutrality \(see [Section 6.1](6.-what-is-the-recommended-process-for-establishing-a-participant-node/6.1-how-should-a-gbif-participant-select-the-institutional-location-for-a-node)\). 
2. **Leadership and initiative**. Nodes need to be able to stimulate interest and mobilize people and organizations to publish and use biodiversity data. The node should offer an inspiring, well-connected team engaged in similar initiatives elsewhere, and able to convene multiple communities to encourage participation, collaboration and other synergies effectively. 
3. **A focus on service**. Nodes are established to assist a community of people and institutions, and should therefore seek to serve rather than dictate. As a support facility for the Participant’s network, the service-oriented approach should permeate all the activities carried out by the node. 
4. **Adaptability**. Nodes need the ability to respond to change in the typically broad and complex landscape of funders, contributors and partners, to adapt their strategies to maintain their relevance, and to provide continuously stable services to their stakeholders. These qualities can benefit from a focus on periodic evaluation and assessment, as well as by providing ongoing learning opportunities for the node’s staff.

